Anna Davis Anne Disney Debra Smith YEAR 12    COPYRIGHT NOTICE  Copyright in this work is owned by Cengage Learning Australia (“the work”). A condition of purchase of this electronic version of the work is that you agree to respect the copyright in the work, abide by the Copyright Act 1968 and specifically agree not to transfer, sell, assign, misuse, copy or transmit an electronic or other version of the work to any third party.  Please note:  This product is accompanied by a licence (single user, network or adoption) governing the terms and conditions of its use.  This is a legal agreement between the you, (the “Customer”) and Cengage Learning Australia Pty Limited (ABN 14 058 280 149) (the “Licensor”) which provides the terms and conditions of this non-exclusive licence and the limited warranty for the Product. Use of the Product indicates an acknowledgement that the Customer has read and agreed to be bound by the terms and conditions of this Agreement. If you do not agree to these terms and conditions, return the Product to the place of purchase within 15 days of the date of purchase (with proof of purchase) for a full refund  1.  Licence Grant  You do not receive title to the Product. Copyright in the Product (which includes all images, photographs, video, animations, audio, music and text incorporated in the Product, including all of the accompanying printed material) is owned by the Licensor and/or its suppliers and is protected by Australian copyright laws. The Licensor grants you a non-exclusive licence to use the Product subject to the restrictions and terms set out in this Agreement.  2.  A Licence allows you to:  Use the Product on your computer. The Customer represents that they shall in no way place the Product in the public domain or in any way compromise our copyright in the Material. You agree to take reasonable steps to protect our copyright.  3.  You may not:  Alter, modify, translate, reverse engineer, decompile, or adapt the software or create derivative works based on the Product. Make further copies by any means technological, electronic, digital whatsoever without the written permission of the Licensor. Rent or transfer all or any part of your rights under this Agreement. Remove or alter any copyright or other proprietary notice or label attached to the software.  4.  Termination  Any failure to comply with the terms and conditions of this agreement will result in the automatic termination of this licence. Upon termination of this licence for any reason, the Customer must destroy or return to the Licensor all copies of the software and accompanying documentation.  5.  Warranties  To the extent permitted by law, the Licensor’s liability for any breach of the warranty or any term implied by law into this licence is limited to the lowest cost of replacing the goods, acquiring equivalent goods or having the goods repaired.  Anna Davis  Anne Disney Debra Smith YEAR 12  Chemistry In Focus Year 12 2nd Edition Anna Davis Anne Disney Debra Smith Contributing authors: Veronica Hayes, Rachel Whan 9780170408998  Publisher: Eleanor Gregory Project editor: Felicity Clissold Editor: Scott Vandervalk Proofreader: Marcia Bascombe Permissions researcher: Wendy Duncan Indexer: Don Jordan (Antipodes Indexing) Text design: Leigh Ashforth (Watershed Design) Cover design: Chris Starr (MakeWork) Cover image: iStock.com/ultramarinfoto Production controller: Karen Young Typeset by: MPS Limited Any URLs contained in this publication were checked for currency during the production process. Note, however, that the publisher cannot vouch for the ongoing currency of URLs.  © 2018 Cengage Learning Australia Pty Limited  Copyright Notice  This Work is copyright. No part of this Work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means without prior written permission of the Publisher. Except as permitted under the  Copyright  Act  1968,  for example any fair dealing for the purposes of private study, research, criticism or review, subject to certain limitations. These limitations include: Restricting the copying to a maximum of one chapter or 10% of this book, whichever is greater; providing an appropriate notice and warning with the copies of the Work disseminated; taking all reasonable steps to limit access to these copies to people authorised to receive these copies; ensuring you hold the appropriate Licences issued by the Copyright Agency Limited (“CAL”), supply a remuneration notice to CAL and pay any required fees. For details of CAL licences and remuneration notices please contact CAL at Level 11, 66 Goulburn Street, Sydney NSW 2000, Tel: (02) 9394 7600, Fax: (02) 9394 7601 Email: info@copyright.com.au Website: www.copyright.com.au For product information and technology assistance, in Australia call  1300 790 853 ; in New Zealand call  0800 449 725  For permission to use material from this text or product, please email  aust.permissions@cengage.com National Library of Australia Cataloguing-in-Publication Data  A catalogue record for this book is available from the National Library of Australia.  Cengage Learning Australia  Level 7, 80 Dorcas Street South Melbourne, Victoria Australia 3205  Cengage Learning New Zealand  Unit 4B Rosedale Office Park 331 Rosedale Road, Albany, North Shore 0632, NZ For learning solutions, visit  cengage.com.au  Printed in China by China Translation & Printing Services. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 22 21 20 19 18  iii 9780170408998  Qualitative equilibrium  24  2.1  Non-equilibrium systems  25  2.2  Reversible reactions  28  2.3  Dynamic equilibrium  34  2.4  Changes to equilibrium  39  Chapter summary  50  Chapter review questions  51  Working scientifically and depth studies  1  1.1  The nature of chemistry  2  1.2  Solving scientific problems – depth studies  4  1.3  Designing your investigation  7  1.4  Conducting your investigation  12  1.5  Analysing data  15  1.6  Communicating your understanding  18  1.7  Ideas for depth studies  21  Chapter summary  22  MODULE FIVE »  EQUILIBRIUM AND ACID REACTIONS  23  1 2  Calculating the equilibrium constant  53  3.1  Equilibrium constant  54  3.2  Measuring equilibrium constants  61  3.3  Uses of equilibrium constants  67  3.4  Effect of temperature on the equilibrium constant  71  3.5  Applications of  K  eq  for different types of chemical reactions  72  Chapter summary  78  Chapter review questions  79  3  CONTENTS  INTRODUCTION  viii AUTHOR TEAM  x AUTHOR ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  x PUBLISHER ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  x USING  CHEMISTRY IN FOCUS  xi OUTCOME GRID  xiii  CONTENTS iv 9780170408998  Solution equilibria  81  4.1  Revision  82  4.2  Dissolution of ionic compounds  85  4.3  Measuring solubility  87  4.4  Australia’s first peoples – removing toxicity from foods  91  4.5  Solubility rules  94  4.6  Solubility equilibrium  100  4.7  Relationship between the  K  sp  and solubility  102  4.8  The common ion effect  107  Chapter summary  113  Chapter review questions  114  4  Properties of acids and bases  118  5.1  Naming inorganic compounds  119  5.2  Properties of common inorganic acids and bases  122  5.3  Reactions of acids  125  5.4  Neutralisation reactions  128  5.5  Changes in understanding of acids and bases  135  Chapter summary  140  Chapter review questions  141  5  Using Brønsted–Lowry theory  143  6.1  Brønsted–Lowry revisited  144  6.2  The pH scale  146  6.3  Concentration versus strength of acids and bases  152  6.4  Self-ionisation of water  158  6.5  Defining and calculating pOH  162  6.6  Applying dissociation constants for acids  165  6.7  Dissociation constants for bases  173  6.8  Revisiting neutralisation  178  Chapter summary  186  Chapter review questions  187  6  End-of-module 5 review  115  MODULE SIX »  ACID/BASE REACTIONS  117  CONTENTS v 9780170408998  MODULE SEVEN »  ORGANIC CHEMISTRY  237  Using quantitative analysis  189  7.1  Volumetric analysis – the basics  190  7.2  Primary standard solutions  195  7.3  Performing volumetric analysis  198  7.4  Other types of titrations  203  7.5  Keeping the balance  221  7.6  Applying analysis techniques  227  Chapter summary  231  Chapter review questions  232  7  Hydrocarbons  238  8.1  Bonding in carbon  239  8.2  Alkanes  242  8.3  Alkenes  246  8.4  Alkynes  249  8.5  Halogenated organic compounds  250  8.6  Isomers  253  8.7  Benzene  254  8.8  Properties of alkanes  256  Chapter summary  259  Chapter review questions  260  8  Functional group compounds  262  9.1  Functional groups  263  9.2  Alcohols  264  9.3  Aldehydes and ketones  273  9.4  Carboxylic acids  276  9.5  Amines and amides  280  Chapter summary  286  Chapter review questions  287  9  End-of-module 6 review  234  Hydrocarbon reactions  289  10.1  Using organic substances safely  290  10.2  Unsaturated hydrocarbon reactions  295  10.3  Saturated hydrocarbon reactions  299  10.4  Implications of obtaining and using hydrocarbons  303  Chapter summary  312  Chapter review questions  313  10  CONTENTS vi 9780170408998  Alcohols  315  11.1  Combustion of alcohols  316  11.2  Dehydration of alcohols  322  11.3  Substitution with hydrogen halides (HX)  322  11.4  Oxidation of alcohols  323  11.5  Production of alcohols  327  11.6  Fuels from different sources  333  Chapter summary  338  Chapter review questions  339  11  Reactions of organic acids and bases  341  12.1  Esters  342  12.2  Preparing esters  344  12.3  Organic acids and bases  349  12.4  Soaps and detergents  352  12.5  Summarising organic compounds and reactions  360  12.6  Designing and constructing flow charts for chemical synthesis  362  Chapter summary  365  Chapter review questions  366  12  Polymers  367  13.1  Synthetic polymers  369  13.2  Addition polymers  371  13.3  Relating properties, uses and structure  381  13.4  Condensation polymers  387  13.5  Natural polymers  393  Chapter summary  398  Chapter review questions  399  13  End-of-module 7 review  401  CONTENTS vii 9780170408998  Analysis of inorganic substances  404  14.1  Why monitor the environment?  405  14.2  Identifying ions in solution  407  14.3  Identifying of cations in solution  409  14.4  Identifying anions in solution  419  14.5  Quantitative analysis of ions  425  14.6  Instrumental quantitative techniques  434  Chapter summary  443  Chapter review questions  444  14  Analysis of organic substances  447  15.1  Chemical tests for functional groups  448  15.2  Analytical techniques: Faster and better  453  15.3  Mass spectroscopy  454  15.4  NMR spectroscopy  461  15.5  Infrared spectroscopy  469  15.6  Ultraviolet–visible spectrophotometry  475  15.7  Combining techniques  480  Chapter summary  482  Chapter review questions  483  15  Chemical synthesis and design  487  16.1  Synthesis reactions  488  16.2  Designing synthesis reactions  490  16.3  Yields of reactions  492  16.4  Issues associated with chemical synthesis  503  16.5  Green polymers – a case study in greening the plastics industry  506  Chapter summary  510  Chapter review questions  511  16  End-of-module 8 review  512  MODULE 8 »  APPLYING CHEMICAL IDEAS  403  APPENDIX 1: PERIODIC TABLE  517 APPENDIX 2: RELATIVE ATOMIC MASSES (ATOMIC WEIGHTS) OF COMMON ELEMENTS  518 APPENDIX 3: GUIDELINES FOR USING SIGNIFICANT FIGURES  519 APPENDIX 4: COMMON IONS, ION COLOURS, FLAME COLOURS AND SOLUBILITIES  520 APPENDIX 5: COMMON UNITS OF MEASUREMENT  522 APPENDIX 6: ACID–BASE INDICATORS  523 APPENDIX 7: RELATIVE ACID STRENGTHS  524 APPENDIX 8: STANDARD ELECTRODE POTENTIALS AT 25°C  526 APPENDIX 9: DATA TABLES  527 STUDENT BOOK ANSWERS  530 GLOSSARY  540 INDEX  547  viii 9780170408998  INTRODUCTION About this book  Chemistry in Focus Year 12  has been written to meet the requirements of the 2017 NESA Chemistry Stage 6 Syllabus  Approach to the syllabus  Chemistry in Focus Year 12  presents a comprehensive coverage of the content of the syllabus, including many first-hand investigations written to reinforce the development of scientific investigation skills that this syllabus emphasises  The authors have presented a collection of investigations that will allow teachers to meet the 35-hour laboratory work component of the Year 12 syllabus  Chapter 1, ‘Working scientifically and depth studies’, is intended to help students develop skills in designing experiments and in planning and performing the depth study that is part of this syllabus  General structure  Chapters 2–16 are grouped into four modules as set out in the syllabus, with chapter titles related to the inquiry questions in the syllabus  Each module ends with an  End-of-module review  providing contextual questions and a list of  Suggestions for  depth studies  A glossary and numerical answers to questions are provided at the end of the book  Structure of chapters  Each chapter starts with an extract from the NESA syllabus that lists the Knowledge and Understanding core content points to be covered in that chapter  Headings and subheadings are used to divide the text into manageable portions  Investigations  are incorporated into the chapter, generally occurring quite early in the treatment of a topic to allow students to discover and explore key concepts before they are treated formally in the text  Strategically located through the chapter are sets of questions, called  Check your understanding  These are a mixture of recall-type questions and simple applications of the preceding material designed to consolidate student learning  Where appropriate,  Worked examples  are included  These are presented in a format that shows students how to go about solving the problem, with the logic provided for individual steps  Each worked example is followed by one or more  Try this  yourself  questions, which provide students with the opportunity to solve new problems using the logic just presented  Summaries of key concepts are located periodically throughout the chapter  These provide students an opportunity to consolidate their learning and they are a good starting point for students in preparing their own summaries, an important part of the learning process  At the end of each chapter is a  Chapter summary , which includes a list of  Important new terms  as an aid for student revision, a summary of the important concepts that students should understand and a list of key skills that students should have developed from studying the chapter  Then follows a set of  Chapter review questions , which are a mixture of recall questions, simple one-step problems through to quite complex multi-step problems and scenario-type questions  The later questions in these sets are intended to extend potential Band 6 students  ix 9780170408998  To the student  The aim of  Chemistry in Focus  is to help you understand and use the basic concepts of chemistry  The emphasis is on ‘help’  You must make the effort and do the hard work to gain that understanding; no book or teacher can do it for you  But if you do make the effort, you will soon come to enjoy chemistry and the fascinating insights it provides into the world around us  The key to success is studying effectively  Effective study methods  For a good understanding of chemistry, you need to study regularly, methodically and without distractions, and you need to  apply  your knowledge to problem-solving and to test yourself frequently on what you have learnt  When you have a new piece of work to study, first skim through the chapter or portion of a chapter to get an idea of what it is about  Then read it carefully to understand what is being said, paying particular attention to the examples and illustrations, because they often get the message across better than descriptions  Write out and learn the important definitions and laws as they are introduced  Just as you cannot speak Italian or Indonesian until you know the vocabulary, so too you cannot speak chemistry unless you know the meaning of technical terms and the important laws  When you think that you understand the material and know the necessary facts, try some of the questions in the  Check your understanding  Try them when they occur in the text – they have been placed at strategic points where the authors think your understanding will be helped by working some examples  Generally in each set of questions the early ones are very simple, but gradually they get harder through the set  Answers are provided for all numerical exercises  Many of the exercises have several parts  There is no need to work through all parts on your first time through the book  Work through the first half or so, and keep the rest for revision  Do not despair if you find the exercises difficult at first  Go back over the text, particularly the worked examples; if you are still having difficulty, ask your teacher or a friend to help you with the first one or two, then try the rest on your own  Eventually you must be able to solve exercises on your own, so do not rely on helpers for too long!  Key aspects  Three of the key aspects of succeeding at chemistry are being able to:  •  write formulae for compounds without having to memorise them  •  write chemical equations for common types of reactions, regardless of which particular compounds are involved  •  do simple quantity calculations based on chemical formulae and equations  Hence, this book places great emphasis on developing these skills – they take time, patience and perseverance for mastery, but the rewards are worth it  In chemistry, as in mathematics and physics, the emphasis is on using the information acquired – working questions and solving problems  Assimilation of facts is necessary but it is not sufficient  So develop the habit of working through questions – and persevering with them until you get them correct – right from the beginning of your course  Other useful study hints  •  Use the glossary and the index.  If, in studying a particular chapter, you cannot remember the meaning of a particular term, look it up so you can better understand the argument at hand  •  Look up cross-references  If the topic you are currently reading refers to a previous section, look it up to make sure you know what it is all about  Interconnecting today’s study with last week’s or last month’s work is an important part of learning  •  Set out your exercises systematically and neatly  This will help you develop logical arguments and make it easy for you to check for errors in your work or for your teacher to diagnose where you are having problems  The worked examples in this text should serve as good models for your own work  •  Take time to understand the concepts.  If you are having difficulty with questions based on a particular topic, take the time to read the relevant part of the text carefully and study it thoroughly  Do not just grab a formula or copy a worked example  Time spent getting to understand the basic idea is definitely not time wasted, even when the object is to get some homework exercises done! You will enjoy chemistry when you can succeed at it (just as you enjoy tennis, dancing or playing an instrument when you can do it properly)  Success in chemistry requires perseverance and practice  INTRODUCTION  x 9780170408998  AUTHOR TEAM Anna Davis  Anna Davis is the Leader of Learning: Science at Casimir Catholic College in Sydney  She has extensive experience as a marker and senior marker for the HSC Chemistry examination  Anna has been a contributing writer for several of the National Science Week Resource books developed by the Australian Science Teachers’ Association (ASTA) and was the convenor of CONASTA 61, the conference of ASTA  She was involved with the development of the Australian Curriculum – Science  Anna has contributed to other Cengage Nelson publications, including iScience for NSW and  Chemistry for the Australian Curriculum  Anna is also a Past President of ASTA and is both a Life Member and Past President of the Science Teachers’ Association of New South Wales  She has extensive experience presenting professional learning events for science teachers throughout NSW in programming and assessment  In 2006, Anna was awarded the Prime Minister’s Prize for Excellence in Science Teaching in Secondary Schools  Anne Disney  Anne Disney is an experienced Chemistry and Physics teacher and is currently in charge of Stage 6 Science at Knox Grammar School as Assistant Head of Department  She has worked in the Northern Territory/South Australian and NSW systems, and was an exam marker and moderator in the South Australian system for both Chemistry and Physics for a number of years  Anne has extensive experience in programming, and was a member of the Australian Curriculum Advisory Committee during the development of the national Physics curriculum  Debra Smith  Debra Smith is an experienced Chemistry teacher and author  Debra has been Head of Science at a number of high schools and been involved in writing science curriculum at the local, state and national levels  She has been President and Treasurer of the Australian Science Teachers’ Association  For her contribution to science education, Debra was awarded the 2010 Prime Minister’s Prize for Excellence in Science Teaching in Secondary Schools  AUTHOR ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  Anne Disney would like to thank Andrew Weeding for enduring constant questions and offering advice and suggestions  Thanks also to Kylie Horton for putting up with my hours at the computer and the constant supply of great food and much needed coffee  Debra Smith would like to thank Joe Sambono for his valuable knowledge and review of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander material  PUBLISHER ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  Eleanor Gregory sincerely thanks Anna, Debra and Anne for their perseverance and dedication in writing this manuscript  She also thanks Deborah de Ridder, Jason Smith and Rachel Whan for reviewing the manuscript to ensure that it was of the best quality  Further thanks to Anna Davis, Anne Disney, Gillian Dewar, Debra Smith and Rachel Whan for writing the online NelsonNet student and teacher material  xi 9780170408998  USING  CHEMISTRY IN FOCUS  Chemistry in Focus Year 12  has been purposely crafted to enable you, the student, to achieve maximum understanding and success in this subject  The text has been authored and reviewed by experienced chemistry educators, academics and researchers to ensure up-to-date scientific accuracy for users  Each page has been carefully considered to provide you with all the information you need without appearing cluttered or overwhelming  You will find it easy to navigate through each chapter and see connections between chapters through the use of margin notes  Practical investigations have been integrated within the text so you can see the importance of the interconnectedness between the conceptual and practical aspects of chemistry  9780170408998  23 » MODULE FIVE  EQUILIBRIUM AND ACID REACTIONS  Science Photo Library/David Taylor  Qualitative equilibrium 2 Calculating the equilibrium constant 3 Solution equilibria 4  9780170408998  Solution equilibria 4  INQUIRY QUESTION How does solubility relate to chemical equilibrium?  Students: •  describe and analyse the processes involved in the dissolution of ionic compounds in water •  investigate the use of solubility equilibria by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples when removing toxicity from foods, for example:  ATSIHC –  toxins in cycad fruit •  conduct an investigation to determine solubility rules, and predict and analyse the composition of substances when two ionic solutions are mixed, for example: –  potassium chloride and silver nitrate –  potassium iodide and lead nitrate –  sodium sulfate and barium nitrate  (ACSCH065) •  derive equilibrium expressions for saturated solutions in terms of  K sp  and calculate the solubility of an ionic substance from its  K  sp  value  ICT  N •  predict the formation of a precipitate given the standard reference values for  K sp . Chemistry Stage 6 Syllabus © NSW Educational Standards Authority for and on behalf of the Crown in right of the State of New South Wales, 2017  OUTCOMES 81 81 Shutterstock.com/Sashkin Using  Q  to determine equilibrium  Q  can be used to determine whether or not a system is at equilibrium. Therefore, if  Q  =  K eq  then the system is at equilibrium. If  Q  <  K eq , then there are less products (the numerator is smaller) and more reactants (the denominator is larger) than at equilibrium. This indicates that the forward reaction will be favoured for the system to reach equilibrium. Conversely, if  Q  >  K eq , then there are more products and less reactants than at equilibrium. This indicates that the reverse reaction will be favoured for the system to reach equilibrium.  ●  If  Q  <  K eq , the forward reaction will be favoured to reach equilibrium.  ●  If  Q  >  K eq , the reverse reaction will be favoured to reach equilibrium.  ●  If  Q  =  K eq , then the system is at equilibrium.  KEY CONCEPTS  Size of the equilibrium constant  The magnitude of  K eq  can tell us whether there are more products or reactants in a system at equilibrium. As the products are in the numerator of the equilibrium expression, a large value of  K eq  indicates the concentration of products is much greater than the concentration of reactants. Therefore:  ◗  a large value of  K eq  indicates that the reaction goes towards completion, meaning that nearly all of the reactants become products; thus, equilibrium lies to the right, since there are more products present at equilibrium than reactants  ◗  a small value of  K eq  indicates that the reaction only occurs to a small extent; thus, equilibrium lies to the left, since there are more reactants than products at equilibrium  ◗  a value of  K eq  close to 1 indicates that there are significant concentrations of both reactants and products present at equilibrium.  ●  Equilibrium constants predict the relative concentrations of products and reactants and therefore the position of equilibrium.  ●  If  K eq  >  1, the equilibrium lies to the right.  ●  If  K eq  <  1, the equilibrium lies to the left.  KEY CONCEPTS  For example, the equilibrium constant for the pop test, which is the reaction between hydrogen gas and oxygen gas to form water vapour, is 2.4  ×  10 47  at 500  K. The equation for this reaction is: 2H 2 (g)  +  O 2 (g)  �  2H 2 O(g)  … (3.5) Therefore, the equilibrium expression is:  Learning across the curriculum content  has been identified by NESA as important learning for all students  This content provides you with the opportunity to develop general capabilities beyond the Chemistry course, as well as links into areas that are important to Australia and beyond  This content has been identified by a margin icon  Mathematical relationships are presented in context  Step-by-step instructions on how to perform mathematical calculations are shown in the  worked examples  The logic behind each step is explained and you can practise these steps by attempting the related problems presented at the end of the worked example  Numeracy  The content is organised under four modules as set out in the NESA Stage 6 Chemistry syllabus  Each module begins with a module opening page  Each chapter begins with a  chapter opening  page  This presents the learning outcomes from the NESA Stage 6 Chemistry syllabus that will be covered in the chapter and also gives you the opportunity to monitor your own progress and learning  To improve comprehension, a number of strategies have been applied to the preparation of our text to improve literacy and understanding  One of these is the use of shorter sentences and paragraphs  This is coupled with clear and concise explanations and real-world examples  New terms are bolded as they are introduced and are consolidated in an end-of-book glossary  Throughout the text, important ideas, concepts and theories are summarised in  key concept  boxes  This provides repetition and summary for improved assimilation of new ideas  xii 9780170408998  USING CHEMISTRY IN FOCUS  Chemistry is a science and you need to be given the opportunity to explore and discover the chemical world through practical investigations  Investigations  introduce and reinforce the Working scientifically skills listed in the NESA Stage 6 Chemistry syllabus  In some cases, the investigations are open-ended  These provide you the opportunity to design and carry out your own scientific investigation, either individually or in a group  At times you are prompted to consider ideas for improvement or further investigation to illustrate that science is an ongoing and improving process  At other times investigations are secondary-sourced, meaning that you need to research the subject using data and information gained by other people  Further information on how to conduct a scientific investigation can be found in the scientific investigations and depth studies  chapter on page 387  Regular opportunities to recall new terms and review recent concepts are provided as short  check your understanding  question sets throughout each chapter  The  risk assessment  table occurs within the investigations  The table highlights the risks of the investigation and provides suggestions on how to minimise these risks – they are not to be considered comprehensive  Teachers are expected to amend this table in the case of substitutions or in the case of any additional risks  This may mean obtaining and following Safety Data Sheets (SDS) for certain chemicals  All teachers are required to follow the safety guidelines of their specific school and associated government legislation when students are in their care  Full understanding of a concept is often constructed from many pieces of information  Due to the sequential nature of a book, this information cannot always be presented together as it is best placed in other chapters  Links between concepts that occur on other pages and chapters are indicated using the  margin notes  ! RISK ASSESSMENT  Amphoteric substances were discussed in section 5.2 page 124.  9780170408998  CHAPTER 6 »  USING BRØNSTED–LOWRY THEORY  161  HNO 3 (aq)  +  H 2 O(l)  →  H 3 O  (aq)  +  NO 3  (aq)  •  Determine the stoichiometric relationship and calculate the concentration: [H  3 O + ]  =  [HNO 3 ] [HNO 3  ]  =  2.51  ×  10 − 4  mol L − 1  TRY THESE YOURSELF 1  Potassium hydroxide is a strong base. Determine the pH of a 0.04 mol L − 1  potassium hydroxide solution.  2  If the pH of the NaOH solution was 9.5, what was the concentration of the solution?  3  If [OH − ]  =  4.7  ×  10 − 8  mol L − 1  in a HCl solution, calculate the concentration of HCl.  ●  In a solution, the concentration of [H 3  O + ] compared to the [OH − ] can be used to determine whether a solution is acidic, alkaline or neutral. KEY CONCEPTS  1  Write the equation to show the self-ionisation of water.  2  a  Write the  K w  expression for water. Include the numerical value of  K w  at 25°C.  b  Explain why [H 2 O] is not included in the  K w  expression.  3  Determine the concentrations of H 3 O +  and OH −  in aqueous solutions of:  a  black coffee (pH = 5.0)  b  dishwasher liquid (pH = 13.0)  c  cola drink (pH = 3.0).  4  Determine the pH of each of the following substances that ionise or dissociate completely into ions in aqueous solution.  a  0.01 mol L − 1  HNO 3  b  0.1 mol L − 1  NaOH  c  1 mol L − 1  HCl  d  0.230 mol L − 1  hydrochloric acid  e  0.005 mol L − 1  Ca(OH) 2  5  What is the concentration of the following solutions?  a  KOH solution with a pH of 11.5  b  HCl with a pH of 3  c  Calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH) 2 ) solution with a pH of 10  CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING  6.4  9780170408998  CHAPTER 7 »  USING QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS  7  CHAPTER SUMMARY  IMPORTANT NEW TERMS  After studying this chapter you should know the meaning of the following terms:  accuracy  (p. 191)  aliquot  (p. 217)  alkaloid  (p. 230)  analgesic  (p. 229)  analyte  (p. 198)  back titration  (p. 208)  buffer  (p. 221)  buffer capacity  (p. 222)  conductometric titration  (p. 206)  end point  (p. 191)  equivalence point  (p. 190)  parallax error  (p. 191)  primary standard  (p. 196)  quantitative analysis  (p. 190)  tare (p. 196) titrant  (p. 198)  titratable acidity  (p. 227)  titration  (p. 190)  volumetric analysis  (p. 190)  AFTER STUDYING THIS CHAPTER YOU SHOULD KNOW:  ◗  the definitions for all terms in the Important new terms list  ◗  quantitative analysis involves the measurement of numerical data  ◗  the difference between equivalence point and end point  ◗  the correct technique for preparing volumetric flasks, pipettes and burettes for use  ◗  the colour changes for common acid–base indicators  ◗  the criteria for a substance to be used as a primary standard: –  large molar mass –  cheap –  high purity –  stable in the presence of air –  absence of any water of hydration –  dissolves readily in solvent  ◗  the correct technique for performing a titration  ◗  how to choose the appropriate indicator for specific types of acid–base titrations  ◗  the shapes of titration curves for different types of acid–base reactions  ◗  the shapes of conductivity curves for different types of acid–base reactions  ◗  the different types of titrations: acid–base titrations, back titrations and redox titrations  ◗  buffer systems are conjugate acid–base pairs  ◗  the importance of buffers in natural systems and how they maintain pH  ◗  analysis techniques applied to industry  ◗  Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People use of acids and bases.  YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO:  ◗  use volumetric flasks, pipettes and burettes to measure accurate volumes of solutions  ◗  read volumes accurately without parallax error  ◗  use indicators to classify solutions as acidic, basic or neutral  ◗  prepare a primary standard solution  ◗  calculate the concentration of a solution, given the mass of solute and volume of solution  ◗  perform a titration to obtain valid, reliable and accurate results  ◗  use volumetric analysis to calculate the concentration of an unknown solution using the: –  concentration of known solution –  volume of known solution –  volume of unknown solution  ◗  use pH curves and conductivity graphs to determine the end point of a titration.  231 9780170408998 MODULE SIX »  ACID/BASE REACTIONS 122 INVESTIGATION  5.1 Preparing and using natural indicators  INTRODUCTION  Acid–base indicators are substances that in solution change colour depending on whether the solution is acidic or basic/alkaline. Various plants, including red cabbage, contain certain dyes that can act as acid–base indicators. The actual range of acidity or alkalinity over which indicators change colour varies from one indicator to another.  AIM  To prepare and test natural indicators on a range of substances to determine their acidity or alkalinity.  It was the effects of acids and bases on vegetable dyes such as litmus that was initially used to help classify substances as acids and bases. Litmus can be found and extracted from different species of lichens such as  Pamelia sulcate  shown in Figure 5.3. There are many different plants that are sources of dyes that act as  acid–base indicators . Anthocyanins are a class of organic compounds found in many plants including red cabbage, red onion, blueberries, red grapes and violet leaves that change colour in the presence of acids and bases. Other natural sources of acid–base indicators include hydrangea, geranium, petunia and red rose petals and turmeric.  Properties of common inorganic acids and bases  Acids and bases are families of substances, and members of these families can be recognised and defined by their common properties.  5.2  FIGURE 5.3  Pamelia sulcate  is used as a source of dye for litmus.  Science Source/Vaughan Fleming  Common properties of acids include:  ◗  a sour taste (note that students must never taste chemicals in the laboratory)  ◗  conducting electricity in solution  ◗  turning blue litmus (a vegetable dye) red. ( B lue in  A cid goes  R ed –  BAR ) Common properties of bases include:  ◗  a soapy feel in aqueous solution  ◗  a bitter taste (though, again students should never taste them)  ◗  conducting electricity in solution (though not all bases are soluble)  ◗  turning red litmus blue (the opposite of acids).  Edible pH indicator chart Summary of the colour changes that occur in a range of natural indicators 9780170408998  CHAPTER 4 »  SOLUTION EQUILIBRIA  101  sp  4 The equilibrium expression is written in the same way as the other equilibrium expressions in chapter 3. It includes the concentration of the chemical species raised to the power of the coefficient in the balanced chemical equation. Hence, the equilibrium expression for equation 4.4 is given in equation 4.5:  K  sp  =  × +  − [A  ]  [B ] 2  2  … (4.5) Equilibrium systems will only occur for ‘sparingly soluble’ or ‘insoluble’ salts. Hence, equilibrium expressions are only written for these types of salts.  WORKED EXAMPLE  4.3  Write the equilibrium expression for each of the following insoluble compounds.  1  Calcium hydroxide  2  Iron(II) phosphate  ANSWER  LOGIC 1  Ca(OH) 2  (s)  ⇌  Ca 2 + (aq)  +  2OH − (aq)  =  × +  − [Ca  ]  [OH ] 2  2 K  sp  •  Write the balanced chemical equation for the compound and its ions.  •  Write the equilibrium expression for this heterogeneous system. Remember to: –  only include aqueous species –  raise each species to the power of its coefficient in the balanced chemical equation.  2  Fe 3  (PO 4 ) 2  (s)  ⇌  3Fe  2 + (aq)  +  2PO 4 3 − (aq)  =  × +  − [Fe  ]  [PO  ] 2  3  4 3  2 K  sp  •  Write the balanced chemical equation for the compound and its ions.  •  Write the equilibrium expression for this heterogeneous system. Remember to: –  only include aqueous species –  raise each species to the power of its coefficient in the balanced chemical equation.  TRY THESE YOURSELF  Write the equilibrium expression for each of the following insoluble compounds.  1  Calcium carbonate  2  Lead(II) chloride  3  Magnesium phosphate  ●  Dynamic equilibrium is when the rate at which ions are breaking away from the ionic lattice is equal to the rate at which ions are rejoining the lattice. It is shown by the expression: AB 2  (s)  ⇌  A 2 + (aq)  +  2B − (aq)  KEY CONCEPTS  Critical and creative thinking  Numeracy  The  chapter review  section, which appears at the end of each chapter, provides the following:  •  a list of  important new terms  •  a  chapter summary  that lists the important concepts and skills  This will be a valuable tool when you are revising for tests and exams  •  end-of-chapter review questions  that review understanding and provide opportunities for application and analysis of concepts and how they interrelate 287 9780170408998  CHAPTER 9 »  FUNCTIONAL GROUP COMPOUNDS  9  CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS  1  Identify the functional group in each of the following compounds.  a  OH H CH  3  CH  3 C  b  O CH 2 CH 3  OH C  c  H H H N C H H  d  O O CH  3 CH  2 CH  2 C  CH  3  e  CH  3  C O CH 2  CH  3  f  H O CH 2 C  CH  2  CH  3  g  H H C O N CH  3  CH  2  2  In general, in organic formulae an R group is often used. Explain what the R group represents.  3  Identify the functional group, draw its structure and give the general formula for alcohols, aldehydes, ketones and carboxylic acids.  4  Distinguish between an amine and amide in terms of structure and physical properties.  5  For each of the following molecules, identify the homologous series it belongs to and write its correct IUPAC name.  a  CH 2 CH CH 3  CH 3 OH  b  N H C CH 3  CH  3 O  c  O OH CH  3  CH  2  C  d  CH  3  CH  2  CH  2  NH 2  e  CH 3 CH  2  CHCH 2 COCH 2 CH  3 CH 2 CH 3  f  CH 2 CH 3 CH 3  C CH  2  CH 3 OH  6  Draw structural formulae for the following.  a  2-heptanol  b  4,5-dimethyl-2-hexanone  c  2-ethylbutanoic acid  d  3-ethyl-1-hexanol  e  Pentanamide  f  3-heptanamine  g  N -methylpropanamide  h  2-fluorobutanal  i  3-methyl-2-butanone  7  Identify one alcohol, one aldehyde and one carboxylic acid that have common names. Draw each molecule and give its correct IUPAC name.  8  Draw structural formulae for the following and give the systematic names for:  a  all isomers with molecular formula C 3  H 8 O  b  carboxylic acids with molecular formula C 4  H 8 O.  9  Compare the intermolecular forces and relative boiling points of the following classes of organic compounds.  a  Alkanes and alcohols  b  Carboxylic acids and aldehydes  c  Alcohols and aldehydes  d  Amines and amides  10  Using examples from the alcohol, aldehyde, ketone, carboxylic acid, amine or amide groups:  a  explain the difference between chain and positional isomers  b  explain the term ‘functional group isomer’.  11  Using the molecules 1-pentanol, 2-pentanol and 2-methyl-2-propanol, explain the difference between primary, secondary and tertiary alcohols.  Qz  Review quiz  Each module concludes with a  module review  This contains short-answer questions that provide you with the opportunity to assimilate content that may occur across the chapters that fall within that module  MODULE 5  : EQUILIBRIUM AND ACID REACTIONS  » END-OF-MODULE REVIEW  1  Nitric oxide reacts with oxygen to form nitrogen dioxide: 2NO(g)  +  O  2 (g)  ⇌  2NO  2 (g) The following table gives the equilibrium constant for this reaction at different temperatures.  TEMPERATURE ( ° C)  EQUILIBRIUM CONSTANT  477  112 727  1.60 1227  2.4  ×  10 − 2 1727  6.4  ×  10 − 4  a  Write the equilibrium expression for this reaction.  b  Justify whether the formation of nitrogen dioxide is endothermic or exothermic.  c  Justify the conditions required to maximise the production of nitrogen dioxide.  d  The mixture of gases is at equilibrium at 477 ° C. There is 0.17  mol L − 1  oxygen and 0.60  mol L − 1  nitrogen dioxide.  4  The production of sulfuric acid involves a number of steps, one of which is the gaseous equilibrium reaction between sulfur dioxide and oxygen to form sulfur trioxide. A scaled-down version of the reaction was performed in a 3  L container. Initially, 0.18  mol of sulfur dioxide was added to 0.15 mol of oxygen. After equilibrium was reached, the concentration of sulfur trioxide was 0.12  mol. Calculate the equilibrium constant for the reaction.  5  Ammonia is produced from nitrogen and hydrogen in the Haber process: N  2 (g)  +  3H 2 (g)  ⇌  2NH 3 (g) The graph below shows the variations in the concentrations of each species over time. At time C, the temperature was increased.  ration (mol L –1 )  N 2 H 2  Answer the following questions.  Numeracy  Literacy  Critical and creative thinking  xiii 9780170408998  OUTCOME GRID Working Scientifically mapping  Content statements from the NESA Stage 6 Chemistry syllabus are shown in full on the chapter opening pages of the chapters where they are dealt with  A full mapping of chapters and content statements can be found on the NelsonNet Teacher website  Below is a mapping of the outcome statements for Working scientifically across all the chapters of  Chemistry in Focus Year 12  OUTCOME STATEMENTS STUDENTS:  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  1  CH11/12-1 develops and evaluates questions and hypotheses for scientific investigation  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  2  CH11/12-2 designs and evaluates investigations in order to obtain primary and secondary data and information  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  3  CH11/12-3 conducts investigations to collect valid and reliable primary and secondary data and information  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  4  CH11/12-4 selects and processes appropriate qualitative and quantitative data and information using a range of appropriate media  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  5  CH11/12-5 analyses and evaluates primary and secondary data and information ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  6  CH11/12-6 solves scientific problems using primary and secondary data, critical thinking skills and scientific processes  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  7  CH11/12-7 communicates scientific understanding using suitable language and terminology for a specific audience or purpose  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  ✓  NelsonNet  NelsonNet is your protected portal to the premium digital resources for Nelson textbooks, located at  www. nelsonnet.com.au  Once your registration is complete you will have access to a helpful suite of digital resources for each chapter to further enhance and reinforce learning  ▻  Conduct an investigation using colourimetry to determine the  K  a  of an indicator.  ▻  Research the use of different analysis techniques in the wine industry.  ▻  Conduct an investigation to identify the presence of cations and/or anions in a sample of contaminated water.  ▻  Conduct gravimetric analysis to compare the sulfate content of different brands of fertiliser.  ▻  Conduct an investigation to compare the effectiveness of gravimetric analysis with precipitation titration for determining the concentration of salt in saltwater.  ▻  Research the cause and effect of an environmental issue (for example, acid rain, chemical spill, enhanced greenhouse effect).  ▻  Research the instrumental methods used to determine blood alcohol content or detect drugs.  ▻  Research the use of analysis techniques used in detecting artwork forgeries.  ▻  Conduct an investigation to measure the yield from a reaction used to produce an ester.  ▻  Research the use of a biopolymer that is replacing a synthetic polymer.  ▻  Conduct an investigation to synthesise aspirin and then determine the purity of the product.  20  A group of students were given an assignment in which they were to prepare a sample of copper(II) sulfate from copper(II) carbonate. The reaction for the preparation was: CuCO 3 (s)  +  H 2 SO 4 (aq)  +  5H 2 O(l)  →  CuSO 4 ⋅ 5H 2 O(s)  +  H 2 O(l)  +  CO 2 (g) They reacted 2.5  g of copper carbonate with 45  mL of 1  mol  L −1  sulfuric acid and obtained 4.6  g of the product, CuSO 4 ⋅ 5H 2 O. Calculate the percentage yield of the reaction.  516  MODULE EIGHT  » APPLYING CHEMICAL IDEAS  9780170408998  The  depth study  provides you with the opportunity to pursue a topic of interest from within the course  It enables you to study a topic in more depth and present your findings in a format of your choice  Advice and support to assist you in undertaking your depth study can be found in chapter 17, as well as suggestions for topics provided at the end of each module review  Refer to the NESA Stage 6 Chemistry syllabus for the full details on scoping and completion of your depth study  Each chapter will be supplemented with the following digital resources  •  Worksheets to review concepts and to practise applying understanding to new examples  •  A review quiz containing 20 auto-correcting multiple-choice questions to review understanding  •  Links to websites that contain extra information  These are hotspotted within the NelsonNetBook and they can also be accessed at  http:// chemistryinfocus12.nelsonnet.com.au  Disclaimer  Please note that complimentary access to NelsonNet and the NelsonNetBook is only available to teachers who use the accompanying student textbook as a core educational resource in their classroom  Contact your sales representative for information about access codes and conditions  Chemistry Stage 6 Syllabus © NSW Educational Standards Authority for and on behalf of the Crown in right of the State of New South Wales, 2017    1 9780170408998  Shutterstock.com/Phattana Stock  Working scientifically and depth studies 1  Students:  •  CH12-1  develops and evaluates questions and hypotheses for scientific investigation  •  CH12-2  designs and evaluates investigations in order to obtain primary and secondary data and information  •  CH12-3  conducts investigations to collect valid and reliable primary and secondary data and information  •  CH12-4  selects and processes appropriate qualitative and quantitative data and information using a range of appropriate media  •  CH12-5  analyses and evaluates primary and secondary data and information  •  CH12-6  solves scientific problems using primary and secondary data, critical thinking skills and scientific processes  •  CH12-7  communicates scientific understanding using suitable language and terminology for a specific audience or purpose.  Chemistry Stage 6 Syllabus © NSW Educational Standards Authority for and on behalf of the Crown in right of the State of New South Wales, 2017  OUTCOMES  9780170408998 CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES 2  This chapter is primarily designed to assist students with the  depth study  section of the syllabus. The syllabus indicates that all depth studies must address the following outcomes:  ◗  CH12-1  – questioning and predicting  ◗  CH12-7  – communicating. Therefore,  significant  parts  of  this chapter have focused on addressing these outcomes. The information in this chapter may  also  assist  with  performing  other investigations throughout the course. Science is the systematic study of the natural and physical world. This study involves both observing the natural and physical world and conducting investigations on it. Science is  empirical , which means that scientists answer questions by using evidence – in particular, observational and experimental evidence.  The nature of chemistry  Scientific knowledge and theories are able to be tested. Importantly, they are open to being disproved, that is, they are  falsifiable . Scientists are never able to state that a theory has been proven, they are only able to state that there is a considerable body of evidence available that supports the theory. However, if evidence is available that does not support the theory, then the theory is disproved. Hence, a theory can be disproved but can never be proved. Einstein stated this eloquently, when he said, ‘No amount of experimentation can ever prove me right; a single experiment can prove me wrong.’ If there is a large body of evidence available to support a theory, then it is widely accepted by the scientific community. An example of this is atomic theory. At present, there is a very large body of evidence that supports this theory. It has been used to make predictions about atoms and evidence has been collected that supports these predictions. Hence, it is widely accepted by the scientific community that all matter is made of atoms. Not all scientific theories that have been proposed over time are still accepted. An example is the phlogiston theory. Phlogiston was first mentioned by Johann Becker in the mid-late 1600s. The phlogiston theory was used to explain combustion. It indicated that when a substance was combusted, it released another substance called phlogiston. This suggested that the product of the combustion reaction had less mass than the reactant in the reaction. However, over time, as further experimentation occurred, it was found that some substances increased in mass when they were combusted (for example, burning magnesium). The phlogiston theory was widely accepted until the late 1700s when Antoine Lavoisier published his work that involved measurements of closed reaction vessels. He found that a gas, now known to be oxygen, was needed for combustion to occur. This theory of phlogiston is an example of how the theory fitted the body of evidence available in the late 1600s. However, more evidence was gathered throughout the 1700s that was found not to support the phlogiston theory. The theory was disproved and so the theory was no longer widely accepted by the scientific community.  1.1  FIGURE 1.1  Science is characterised by a way of thinking, working and questioning.  Alamy Stock Photo/Cultura Creative (RF)  Critical and creative thinking 9780170408998  CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES 3  The scientific method  The  scientific method  (Figure 1.2) involves systematically gathering data to investigate phenomena. The gathering of data involves both observations and measurements. This data is used to formulate, test and/or modify hypotheses. A  hypothesis  is the tentative answer to a question, which can then be tested. A hypothesis is not a wild guess; it is based on simple observations or a search of the literature. For example, it might be hypothesised that temperature affects the rate of a chemical reaction. This could be tested by measuring the time for a particular reaction to occur at different temperatures. Once the hypothesis has been formulated, an investigation is designed and performed to test the hypothesis. Results are collected and analysed. If the results support the hypothesis, then this increases the body of evidence for the idea or model or theory. If the results do not support the hypothesis, then the scientists need to modify their hypothesis and then test this modified hypothesis. Scientists submit their work to journals for peer review. This is where other scientists, who are experts in the particular field of research, evaluate the scientists’ methodology, results, analysis of results and conclusions. If they decide that it is contributing to the scientific body of knowledge and the investigation and its conclusions are  valid , then the work is published.  Develop a question Conduct research Formulate a hypothesis Design an investigation to test your hypothesis Gather and analyse the results Draw conclusions Evidence supports hypothesis Submit for peer review and possible publication Evidence does not support the hypothesis  FIGURE 1.2  Diagrammatic representation of the scientific method  9780170408998 CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES 4  Chemistry – the central science  Chemistry is considered the ‘central science’ since an understanding of chemistry is necessary to understand many other branches of science. To understand metabolism in the human body, an understanding of chemical reactions and catalysis is required. To understand how metals are extracted from their ores, an understanding of properties of substances, methods of separation and chemical reactions is required. Chemistry can be viewed both macroscopically and microscopically. The macroscopic level involves what can be seen, such as colour changes, bubbling and explosions. The microscopic level involves what happens at the atomic, molecular and ionic level. Chemistry involves questions about the structures of substances. Understanding structures leads to an understanding of the properties of the substance and this in turn leads to the possibility of particular uses or potential uses of the substance. Chemistry also involves questions about how substances interact with other substances. These interactions may be either chemical or physical. By understanding chemical reactions, chemists are able to manipulate a reaction to increase yield or change its rate or even change the products formed. Energy is an important consideration in chemistry. Energy is a driver of chemical reactions; it determines whether the reaction occurs or not. If the reaction occurs, energy determines in which direction it occurs.  Models  are integral to the study of chemistry. Since atoms cannot be seen, chemists use models to help visualise what is happening at the atomic, molecular and ionic level. They use results from investigations to develop models, then use the models to predict a particular structure or property or chemical change of a substance. Further investigations are performed to evaluate these models. Hence, the cycle continues.  Solving scientific problems – depth studies  Depth studies are your opportunity to work scientifically and solve scientific problems. They enable you to pursue a particular area of interest that is related to one or more concepts found within the course. When performing a depth study, you will pose questions, develop hypotheses to answer your questions and then seek evidence to support or disprove your hypotheses. The evidence may come from your own experiments or from the existing scientific literature. You will need to analyse data to determine whether or not your hypotheses are supported. Analysing data usually requires you to represent it in some way, often mathematically or graphically. Finally, you will need to communicate your finding to others, just as scientists do. There are many ways that you can do this, and you need to choose the method most appropriate to the audience to whom you wish to communicate your findings. Sometimes scientists work individually, though more often they work collaboratively with others. Different members of the research team may have different roles and responsibilities. This can also occur when completing your depth study since it can be done either individually or collaboratively. Completing a depth study allows you, either individually or collaboratively to:  ◗  put into practice the skills of working scientifically  ◗  deepen your understanding of a specific course concept  ◗  compare claims in the media with information found in the scientific literature  ◗  develop and perform investigations to test claims about products or claims made in the media related to a specific course concept  1.2  Science and pseudoscience  Read this article about the scientific method and come up with your own explanation of the difference between science and pseudoscience.  9780170408998  CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES 5  ◗  search the literature to produce a coherent response on the development of our understanding about a chemical concept over time  ◗  analyse data to draw out important trends or key information.  Types of depth study  There are two main types of depth study.  ◗  During  primary source investigations  you physically perform the investigation and collect your own data. This data may be from fieldwork or investigations conducted in the laboratory or at home. Working models are also considered to be first-hand investigations since you are constructing the model.  ◗  In  secondary source investigations  you use data or information collected by someone else. It usually includes a search of the literature. Analysing the historical development of a chemistry concept is an example of a secondary source investigation. Depth studies may be presented in a variety of ways, some of which include:  ◗  scientific reports  ◗  media articles  ◗  video or animation  ◗  poster presentation. Depth studies always involve the analysis of data. It is important that this is presented in a way that makes it easy to understand (for example, tables, graphs, flow charts and diagrams such as graphic organisers).  Stages in a depth study  The summary below outlines four main stages of conducting a depth study, as well as the Working scientifically skills that you will need to develop and apply at each stage.  1  Initiating and planning involves:  ◗  Questioning and predicting  (CH12-1) : formulating questions or hypotheses  ◗  Planning investigations  (CH12-2) : researching background information; assessing risks and ethical issues; planning valid experiments  2  Implementation and recording  ◗  Conducting investigations  (CH12-3) : safely carrying out valid investigations using appropriate technology and measuring instruments  ◗  Processing data and information  (CH12-4) : collecting, organising, recording and processing data/ information  3  Analysing and interpreting  ◗  Analysing data and information  (CH12-5) : looking for trends or patterns, finding mathematical relationships and evaluating data  ◗  Problem solving  (CH12-6) : drawing and justifying conclusions, testing hypotheses and answering questions  4  Communicating  (CH12-7)  ◗  Using appropriate language, visualisations and technologies to communicate scientific ideas, procedures and results  9780170408998 CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES 6  Record keeping – your logbook  You will need to keep a record of what you do during your investigation. You do this in a  logbook . Scientists keep a logbook for each project that they work on. A logbook is a legal document for a working scientist. If the work is called into question, then the logbook acts as important evidence. Every entry in a scientist’s logbook is dated, records are kept in indelible form (pen – not pencil), and entries may even be signed. Scientists’ logbooks include:  ◗  details of experiments, such as methods and results  ◗  comments and ideas  ◗  thoughts about experiments and analysis  ◗  printouts of data  ◗  photocopies of relevant information  ◗  photos and other items. The logbook is the primary source of information when scientists write up their work for publication. Logbooks are sometimes provided as evidence in court cases; for example, in patent disputes or when a researcher is accused of falsifying data or stealing someone else’s results. Your logbook may be a hard copy or an electronic record. Either way, your logbook is a detailed record of  what you did  and  what you found out  during your investigation. Make an entry in the logbook  every  time you work on your depth study. At the start of each session, you should record the date and the names of all the people with whom you are working at the time. A logbook is an important part of any investigation, regardless of whether it is a primary source investigation or a secondary source investigation. Always write down what you do as you do it (Figure 1.2). It is easy to forget what you did if you do not write it down immediately. Annotated diagrams are often a concise way of presenting ideas and information. Record the results of all measurements  immediately and directly into your logbook, and in pen if using a hard copy .  Never  record data onto bits of scrap paper instead of your logbook! Results must be recorded in indelible form. Never write your results in pencil or use white-out. If you want to cross something out, just put a line through it and make a note explaining why it was crossed out. If you are using an electronic logbook, then do not delete data or working or calculations; instead, use tracked changes or the strikethrough feature and add a comment explaining why it was crossed out. Your teacher will advise whether an electronic logbook is acceptable.  ●  A good logbook contains: –  notes taken during the planning of your investigation –  a record of when, where and how you carried out each experiment –  diagrams showing the experimental set-ups, circuit diagrams, etc. –  all your raw results –  all your derived results, analysis and graphs –  all the ideas you had while planning, carrying out experiments and analysing data –  printouts, file names and locations of any data not recorded directly in the logbook.  ●  A logbook is not a neat record, but it is a complete record.  KEY CONCEPTS  FIGURE 1.3  Make sure you keep an accurate record of what you do as you do it.  iStockphoto/SteveStone  Critical and creative thinking  Literacy  Information and communication technology capability  Critical and creative thinking 9780170408998  CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES 7  Designing your investigation  There are many things to consider when designing an investigation. You need to consider the time available and the resources that might be required. However, a starting point is to come up with a  research question  or hypothesis.  Posing questions and formulating hypotheses  It is a good idea to investigate something that you find interesting. A good way to start is by ‘brainstorming’ for ideas. This is useful whether you are working on your own or in a group. Write down as many ideas as you can think of. Do not be critical at this stage. Get everyone in the group to contribute and accept all contributions uncritically (Figure 1.4). Write down all ideas. After you have run out of ideas, it is time to start being critical. Decide which questions or ideas are the most interesting. Think about which of these it is possible to investigate  scientifically  given  the  time  and  resources available. Do not forget that the most important resources you have are the skills of the people in the group. Make a shortlist of questions, but keep the long list too for the moment. Once you have your shortlist, it is time to start refining your ideas.  Refining your question – literature review  Your depth study will be based on one of the chemical concepts that you have encountered during this course. However, the purpose of a depth study is to  extend  your knowledge, while at the same time building your skills at working scientifically. So you will need to go beyond the basic syllabus content. The next step is to find out what is already known about the ideas on your list. You need to do a literature review. A  literature review  is more than just summarising information found in the literature. It involves coherently presenting the research available on the topic and critically analysing the research in terms of methodology and data analysis and identifying areas where further research could be conducted. All investigations involve a search of the literature to help deepen your understanding and to help explain the chemistry related to your area of study. However, some secondary source investigations are completely based on performing a formal literature review. Many universities have guidelines for conducting a literature review, two of which are included in the weblinks here. Use the Internet, your textbooks and the library, but be critical of what you read. Be wary of pseudoscience, and any material that has not been peer reviewed. Apply the CRAAP test to websites that you find. The most valid sites are from educational institutions, particularly universities, government and scientific organisations such as the CSIRO and ANSTO, and professional organisations such as the Royal Australian Chemical Institute and international equivalents. You can narrow your search to particular types of sites by including in your search terms ‘site:edu’ or ‘site:gov’ so that you only find sites from educational or government sources.  1.3  FIGURE 1.4  Brainstorm as many ideas as you can in your group.  Alamy/Jim West  Conducting a literature review  The CRAAP test  Apply the CRAAP test to any websites that you find.  9780170408998 CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES 8  Scientists use a logbook to record all of the work that they do, including recording information that they’ve found, any relevant references and by attaching printouts (Figure 1.5). You should also use a logbook to record this information. It can save you a lot of time later on! Finally, talk to your teacher about your ideas. They will be able to tell you whether your ideas are likely to be possible given the equipment available. They may have had students with similar ideas in the past and can make suggestions. After you have researched your questions and ideas, you will hopefully be able to narrow down the shortlist to the one question that you want to tackle. If none of the questions or ideas look possible (or interesting), then you need to go back to the long list.  Proposing a research question or hypothesis  If you are doing an investigation, then you need to define a research question or a hypothesis. You need to frame the question carefully. It needs to be specific enough that it guides the design of the investigation (Figure 1.6). A specific question rather than a vague one will make the design of your investigation much easier. Asking ‘Will a reaction occur more quickly if the temperature is higher?’ tells you what you will be varying and what you will be measuring. It also gives a criterion for judging whether you have answered the question. Asking ‘What will make a reaction occur the best?’ is not a good question. This question does not say what will be varied, nor does it tell you when you have answered the question. ‘Best’ is a vague term. What you mean by ‘best’ may not be what someone else means by ‘best’. A good research question identifies the variables that will be investigated. All other variables should be  controlled variables . Usually, there will be one  independent variable  and one  dependent variable . When performing an extended investigation such as a depth study, you may test two or more independent variables. However, you only test one variable in any particular experiment. Finally, a good research question should be answerable with the time and equipment available. A hypothesis is a tentative explanation or prediction, not yet confirmed by experiment, as in ‘As the temperature of the sodium thiosulfate solution increases, the rate of reaction with the hydrochloric acid will increase’. Your hypothesis should give a prediction that you can test, ideally quantitatively. A hypothesis is usually based on an existing model or theory. It is a prediction of what will happen in a specific situation based on that model. For example, collision theory is used to describe what happens during a chemical reaction. This can be used to develop a hypothesis regarding factors that affect the rate of a reaction, including temperature.  FIGURE 1.5  Start researching your topic and make sure you keep a record of all of your references. Good record keeping is important in scientific research, and it begins at this stage of the investigation.  Shutterstock.com/Ermolaev Alexander  ●  A good research question is specific and can be answered by performing experiments and making measurements. A good hypothesis is a statement that predicts the results of an experiment and can be tested using measurements.  KEY CONCEPTS  FIGURE 1.6  Your research question will guide the investigation. These students are finding out how temperature affects the rate of a reaction.  Shutterstock.com/sirtravelalo t  Critical and creative thinking 9780170408998  CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES 9  If your experimental results disagree with your hypothesis, then you may have disproved it. This is  not  a bad thing! Often the most interesting discoveries in science start when a hypothesis based on an existing model is disproved, because this raises more questions such as ‘Is there a better model that can be developed to fit the growing body of evidence?’ Even if your question or hypothesis meets these criteria, do not be surprised if you change or modify it during the course of your investigation or depth study. In scientific research, the question you set out to answer is often only a starting point for more questions.  ●  If your experiments agree with predictions based on your hypothesis, then you can claim that they support your hypothesis. This  increases your confidence  in your model, but  it does not prove that it is true . Hence, an aim for an experiment should  never  start ‘To prove …’, since it is not possible to actually prove a hypothesis, only to disprove it.  KEY CONCEPTS  Designing and planning your scientific investigation  There are many things to consider when planning an investigation. You need to think about what is the most appropriate equipment to use to collect the data that is required for the investigation. For example, measuring cylinders are familiar pieces of equipment for measuring volumes; however, it may be more appropriate to use a more precise measuring instrument such as a volumetric flask or a burette or a pipette. You also need to think through the order in which tasks should be performed so that the investigation is completed in a time-efficient manner. There may be other students/groups who require the same specialist equipment that you intend to use. In this case, you will need to liaise with the other students/ groups regarding the use of the equipment so that both investigations can continue in a timely manner. If you are conducting the depth study in a group, you need to think about who is best suited to particular roles within the group and ensure that the work is shared equally. It is important that you keep focused on the purpose of your investigation. At the end of the process, you need good data that answers your question or tests your hypothesis. Having a plan helps you to ensure that you collect the data, whether primary or secondary, that you need to test your hypothesis. The longer the investigation, the more important it is that you have a clear plan. Table 1.1 presents questions that need to be considered whether you are performing a primary source investigation or a secondary source investigation.  TABLE 1.1  Comparison of considerations for both primary source investigations and secondary source investigations  PRIMARY SOURCE INVESTIGATION  SECONDARY SOURCE INVESTIGATION  What data will you need to collect?  What information will you need to gather? What materials and equipment will you need?  What sources will you use? When and where will you collect the data?  When and where will you gather the information? If you are working in a group, what tasks are assigned to which people? If you are working in a group, what tasks are assigned to which people? Who will collect the data?  Who will collect what information? Who will be responsible for record keeping?  How will record keeping be done to avoid plagiarism? How will the data be analysed?  How will the information be analysed? How will sources be referenced?  How will sources be referenced?  9780170408998 CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES 10  You also need to ensure that your investigation is valid and reliable and that any numerical data is precise. The questions in Table 1.2 may help with this.  TABLE 1.2  Assessing validity, reliability and precision in investigations  PRIMARY INFORMATION AND DATA  SECONDARY INFORMATION AND DATA  Validity  Does the investigation test the hypothesis? Have all variables been controlled (controlled variables), except the one being investigated? Does the information relate to the investigation’s hypothesis? Is the author qualified for doing research in this area of chemistry? When was the research published? (i.e. Is there more recent research that is more relevant to the investigation?) Reliability  Has the method been repeated an appropriate number of times? Are the results consistent? Is the information found in several authoritative sources consistent? Precision and accuracy  Have I used the best measuring equipment available, and used it correctly? Have I designed my experiments to minimise uncertainties? Does the data have uncertainties and are these uncertainties small compared to the measured values?  In your planning, ensure that you only change one variable – the independent variable. All other variables need to be kept constant. You need to show how this will be achieved. For example, clearly indicate the volume and concentration of solutions that you will use, the order chemicals will be added and how a stopwatch might be used. Whenever possible, repeat measurements. This allows you to check that your measurements are  reliable . Your results are reliable if repeat measurements give the same results within experimental  uncertainty . If a result is not  reproducible , it is not a reliable result. If a result is not reproducible, then a variable other than the one you are controlling is affecting its value. If this is the case, you need to determine what this other variable is, and control it if possible. When working with numerical data, you also need to consider how many data points to collect. In general, it is better to have more data than less. However, you will have limited time to collect your data, and you need to allow time for analysis and communication of your results. A minimum of 6 to 10 data points is usually required to establish a relationship between variables, if the relationship is linear. A linear relationship is one where if you plot one variable against the other you get a straight line. If you think the relationship might not be linear then take more data points, and think carefully about how they will be spaced. You should try to collect more data in the range where you expect the dependent variable to be changing more quickly (for example, when you are measuring temperatures to identify the boiling point of a substance). The most common problem that students have is time management. It is important to plan to have enough time to perform the experiments, including repeat measurements,  and  to analyse them,  and  to report on them. You also need to allow time to learn how to use particular equipment if you haven’t used it before. Keep a record of your planning in your logbook. Record what you plan to do, and why and this will help you stay focused during the investigation. This is particularly important for a depth study. If you are working in a group, then keep a record of what each person agrees to do. Table 1.3 gives an idea of the types of things you should think about.  9780170408998  CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES 11  TABLE 1.3  Depth study plan  INTRODUCTION TO DEPTH STUDY PLAN  Title  What? Choose a title for your depth study.  Rationale  Why? Explain why you have chosen this area of research. Describe what you are hoping to achieve through this investigation. Include any ways you think your investigation may benefit yourself, your class and possibly your family/friends/the school/wider community (if applicable).  Type of depth study and research model (where applicable)  Which? State the type of depth study you intend conducting (e.g. literature review/practical investigation, etc.). Where applicable, describe any theoretical models that you will use for your depth study. Include references to your reading and explain why you chose this model.  TIMELINE ACTION AND TIME FRAME When? WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY SKILLS How?  1  Initiating and planning  When? (e.g. week 1–2)  Questioning and predicting : formulate questions and/or a hypothesis; make predictions about ideas, issues or problems.  Planning : wide reading – research background information; assess risks and ethical issues; plan valid, reliable and  accurate  methods; select appropriate materials and technologies; identify variables; plan experimental controls and how to measure them.  2  Implementation and recording  When? (e.g. week 2–4)  Conducting investigations : safely carry out valid investigations; make observations and/or accurate measurements; use appropriate technology and measuring instruments.  Processing and recording data and information : collect, organise, record and process information and/or data as you go.  3  Analysing and interpreting  When? (e.g. week 4–mid-week 5)  Analysing data and information : reduce large amounts of data by summarising or coding it; begin looking for trends, patterns or mathematical relationships.  Problem-solving : evaluate the adequacy of data (relevance, accuracy, validity and reliability) from primary and/or secondary sources.  4  Communicating  When? (week 5–mid-week 6).  Presenting your depth study : use appropriate language, scientific terminology, calculations, diagrams, graphing and other models of representation; acknowledge your sources.  5  Final presentation  Due date: end of week 6  DATA COLLECTION  Note that what you submit in your final depth study may be different from your initial planning list.  a  Action – independent variable  Describe what you will change in your investigation.  b  Outcome – dependent variable  What will you measure and how will you measure it? (Quantitative/qualitative data?)  c  Validity – controlled variable  What will you need to keep constant to make this a fair test? What control(s) will you use (if applicable)?  DATA ANALYSIS AND PROBLEM-SOLVING  a  Data analysis  What method(s) will you use to analyse the data and how will you represent the trends and patterns?  b  Conclusion  How will you judge whether the experiment was valid? How will your data allow you to test your hypothesis or answer your question?  Ethical understanding  Personal and social capability  mol/L and mol  L –1  have the same meaning (mol per litre) and can be used interchangeably 9780170408998 CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES 12  Working safely – risk assessment  You may be required to complete a risk assessment before you begin your investigation. You need to think about three things:  ◗  What are the possible risks  to you, to other people, to the environment or property?  ◗  How likely is it  that there will be an injury or damage?  ◗  If there is an injury or damage to property or environment,  how serious are the consequences  likely to be? A ‘risk matrix’, such as Table 1.4, can be used to assess the severity of a risk associated with an investigation. The consequences are listed across the top from negligible to catastrophic. Negligible may be getting clothes dirty. Catastrophic would be a death or the release of a toxin into the environment. When considering the risks involved with chemicals, read the safety data sheet for each chemical used or produced. These are readily available on the Internet. You need to ensure that your investigation is low risk.  TABLE 1.4  Risk matrix for assessing for severity of risk  CONSEQUENCES →  LIKELIHOOD ↓  NEGLIGIBLE  MARGINAL  SEVERE  CATASTROPHIC  Rare  Low risk  Low risk  Moderate risk  High risk Unlikely  Low risk  Low risk  High risk  Extreme risk Possible  Low risk  Moderate risk  Extreme risk  Extreme risk Likely  Moderate risk  High risk  Extreme risk  Extreme risk Certain  Moderate risk  High risk  Extreme risk  Extreme risk  Once you have considered the possible risks, you need to think about what you will do about them. What will you do to minimise them and how will you deal with the consequences if something does happen? You can use a risk assessment table such as in Table 1.5.  TABLE 1.5  Example risk assessment table for managing risks  WHAT  ARE THE RISKS IN DOING THIS  INVESTIGATION?  HOW  CAN YOU MANAGE THESE RISKS TO STAY SAFE?  2  mol  L − 1  HCl is corrosive to skin and clothes.  Clean up all spills immediately. Wear safety glasses and wash hands after handling the chemical.  ●  In primary source investigations you collect and analyse your own data. In secondary source investigations you analyse someone else’s data.  ●  Investigations need to be carefully planned so that they answer your research question. You also need to consider safety and possible environmental impacts of your investigation.  KEY CONCEPTS  Conducting your investigation  If you have planned carefully and learnt how to use the equipment, then your experiments should go smoothly. Always record data immediately, with the correct units and with their uncertainty. Your  raw data  should always be recorded directly into your logbook. Data collected using a data logger should be downloaded and added to your logbook, including referencing details to the electronic file for future use.  1.4  Information and communication technology capability  Numeracy  Literacy  9780170408998  CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES 13  If you are going to be collecting multiple data points, then it is a good idea to draw a table to record them in. Label the columns in the table with the name and units of the variables. If you know that the uncertainty in all your measurements is the same, then you can record this at the top of the column as well. Otherwise, each data entry should have its uncertainty recorded in the cell with it. It is a good idea to start your analysis while you are collecting your data. If you spot an  outlier  and you are still making measurements then you have the opportunity to repeat that measurement. If you make a mistake, then put a line through the mistake, write in the new data, and make a comment in your logbook. If you have not made a mistake, then plotting and analysing as you go allows you to spot something interesting early on. You then have a choice between revising your hypothesis or question to follow this new discovery, or continuing with your plan. Many investigations start with one question and end up answering a completely different one. These are often the most fun, because they involve something new, exciting and sometimes unexpected.  Estimating uncertainties  When you perform experiments, there are typically several sources of uncertainty in your data.  ●  Sources of uncertainty that you need to consider are the: –  limit of reading of the measuring devices –  precision of measuring devices –  variation of the  measurand  (the variable being measured).  KEY CONCEPTS  ●  The limit of reading or resolution is the  minimum  uncertainty in any measurement. Usually the uncertainty is greater than this minimum. KEY CONCEPTS  ●  Many students think that digital devices are more precise than analogue devices. This is often not the case. A digital device may be easier for you to read, but  this does not mean it is more precise . The uncertainty due to the limited precision of the device is generally greater than the limit of reading.  KEY CONCEPTS  For  all  devices there is an uncertainty due to the limit of reading of the device. The limit of reading is different for analogue and digital devices. Analogue devices, such as liquid in glass thermometers, have continuous scales. For an analogue device, the  limit of reading , sometimes called the resolution, is half the smallest division on the scale. You take it as half the smallest division because you will generally be able to see which division mark the indicator (needle, fluid level, etc.) is closest to. So, for a liquid in a glass thermometer with a scale marked in degrees Celsius, the limit of reading is 0.5 ° C. Digital devices, such as digital thermometers and stopwatches, have a scale that gives you a number. A digital device has a limit of reading uncertainty of a whole division. So, a digital thermometer that reads to a whole degree has an uncertainty of 1 ° C. For a digital device, the limit of reading is  always  a whole division, not a half, because you do not know whether it rounds up or down, or at what point it rounds. The measuring device used will have a  precision , usually given in the user manual. For example, a pH meter (which indicates acidity or alkalinity), such as that shown in Figure 1.7a (page 14), may have a precision of 0.5% on a pH scale. This means if you measure a pH of 12.55 on this scale, the uncertainty due to the precision of the meter is 0.005  ×  12.55  =  0.06. This is greater than the limit of reading uncertainty, which is 0.01 in this case.  9780170408998 CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES 14  Finally, the measurand itself may vary. For example, reaction rate is strongly dependent on the temperature, concentration and other factors. Even keeping the conditions as close to identical as possible, it is unlikely that repeat experiments will give you exactly the same results. Making repeat measurements allows you to estimate the size of the variation. Sometimes you will be able to see how the measurand varies during a measurement by watching a needle move or the readings change on a digital device. Watch and record the maximum and minimum values. The difference between the maximum and minimum value is the range: Range  =  maximum value  −  minimum value The value of the measurand is the average value for repeated measurements, or the centre of the range for a single varying measurement: Measurand  =  minimum value  +  ½ (range) The uncertainty in the measurement is half the range: Uncertainty  =  ½ (range)  =  ½ (maximum value  −  minimum value) For example, if you are using an analogue multimeter and you observe that the reading fluctuates between 12.2 and 12.6  V then your measurement should be recorded as (12.4  ±  0.2)  V. Note that the measurement and uncertainty are together in the brackets, indicating that the unit applies to both the measurement and its uncertainty. When you take repeat measurements, the best estimate of the measurand is the average value. If you have taken fewer than ten measurements then the best estimate of the uncertainty is half the range. If you have more than ten measurements, the best estimate of the uncertainty is the standard deviation, given by:  x  x n i Standard deviation (  ) 1 2 1 2  = ∑  − −        where  x i  is an individual value of the measurand,  x  is the average value of the measurand and  n  is the total number of measurements. The sum is over all values of  x i . Most calculators and spreadsheet software have built-in statistical functions  to make calculations such as standard deviation. Remember that repeat measurements means repeating under the same conditions. It is not the same as collecting lots of data points under different conditions.  Function  Precision  pH range  0.00 to 14.00 pH Resolution  0.01 pH Accuracy Accuracy  6  0.5 8 C  6  0.01 pH pH slope range  80 to 120% No. of calibration points  1 to 3 points (push-button) Buffer options pH 4.01, 7.00, 10.01 (USA) Temperature range  0.0 to 100.0 8 C Resolution  0.1 8 C Temperature comp.  Automatic/Manual (0 to 100 8 C) pH 4.01, 6.86, 9.18 (NIST) pH 4.10, 6.97 (Pb)  a  b  FIGURE 1.7  a  A typical small pH meter;  b  a page from the user manual giving the precision on various scales  Courtesy of John Morris Scientific Courtesy of John Morris Scientific  Guide to the expression of uncertainty in measurement  Read more about uncertainties.  9780170408998  CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES 15  Sources of uncertainty all give rise to random errors. That means that repeated measurements will be randomly spread about the ‘true value’, and centred on that value. This is why many measurements are repeated and averages are taken.  Systematic errors  can also occur. These include calibration errors on measuring devices and parallax errors during observations. Sources of systematic errors must be considered during the planning phase and actions taken to ensure that they are avoided when performing the investigation.  ●  The uncertainty in any measurement depends upon the limit of reading of the measuring device, the precision of the device and the variation of the measurand. KEY CONCEPTS  ●  Raw data is the data that you collected during your investigation.  ●  Derived data is any data that you have calculated from the original data that you collected during the investigation.  KEY CONCEPTS  Analysing data  Once you have collected your data, you will need to analyse it. Record all of your analyses in your logbook. The first step in analysing data, whether primary or secondary, is organising it. This will usually involve tabulating it. Tables of data need to have headings with units for each column, and a caption telling you what the data means, or how it was collected. Tables are used for recording raw data, and also for organising  derived data .  1.5  Critical and creative thinking  Numeracy  Information and communication technology capability  Performing calculations with your data  You will usually have to do some calculations with your data as part of your analysis. When you recorded your data, you wrote down the units for all of your measurements as well as the uncertainties. You may need to convert the units and the uncertainties to SI units (International System of Units); for example, mL to L. Include the units with all numbers as you do your calculations. This will ensure that you have the correct units on all derived data. Significant figures are also important when performing calculations with your data. Refer to the appendix for general information on significant figures, including adding and subtracting significant figures. When performing calculations involving concentrations of solutions and pH, the number of decimal places reported in the pH is equal to the number of significant figures in the concentration of the solution. For example: A hydrochloric acid solution has a pH  =  5.43 (this measurement is reported to two decimal places): Concentration of HCl  =  10 − pH  =  10 − 5.43  =  0.00000371535 Since the pH is reported to two decimal places, the concentration of HCl must be reported to two significant figures (i.e. 3.7  ×  10 − 6  mol  L − 1 ).  Identifying trends, patterns and relationships  You may be able to see a pattern simply by looking at a list of numbers in a table. However, it is usually easier to see a pattern in data or a relationship between variables by using a graph. This is especially useful if you are trying to quantify a relationship. For example, is it a linear relationship or an exponential relationship?  9780170408998 CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES 16  Graphs should be large and clear. The axes should be labelled with the names of the variables and their units. The independent variable should be on the  x  axis, while the dependent variable should be on the  y  axis. Choose a scale so that your data takes up most of the plot area. This will often mean that the origin is not shown in your graph and usually there is no reason why it should be. Figure 1.8 shows a good example of a graph and a poor example of a graph.  80 90 70 60 50 40 Temperature  30 20 10 1  2  3  4  5  Time  6  7  8  9  10 100  80 70 60 50 40  Temperature ( 8 C)  30 20 10 1  2  3  4  5  Time (min)  6  7  a  b  FIGURE 1.8  a  A poor example of a graph;  b  a good example of a graph of the same data. How many differences can you see?  When you are looking for a relationship between variables, construct a  scatter plot  (also known as a  scatter graph ). This is a graph showing your data as points. Do not join them up as in a dot-to-dot picture .  To determine a relationship you need to have enough data points and the range of your data points should be as large as possible. A minimum of six data points is generally considered adequate if the relationship is expected to be linear (giving a straight line), but always collect as many as you reasonably can, given the available time. For non-linear relationships you need more data points than this. Try to collect more data in regions where you expect rapid variation. For example, if you are measuring the pressure of a fixed mass of gas at different volumes, as shown in Figure 1.9, then you should expect an inverse relationship and therefore a hyperbola graph. If there are only a limited number of data points, it would be easy to predict the relationship to be linear instead. A good graph to start with is simply a graph of the raw data. You will usually be able to tell if the graph is linear. If it is, then draw a straight line of best fit either by hand or using graphing software. Graphing software has a linear regression tool that calculates an  R  2  number, which is a measure of ‘goodness of fit’. The closer  R  2  is to 1 (or  − 1), the better the fit. If it is not  very  close to 1, typically  FIGURE 1.9  A pressure–volume graph for a gas needs a large number of data points to show the hyperbola shape.  0.80 0.90 0.70 0.60 0.50 0.40  Pressure (atm)  0.30 0.20 0.10 15 10  20  25  30  35  Volume (mL)  40  45  50 1.00  9780170408998  CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES 17  better than 0.95, then the relationship is probably not linear. Alternatively, you can calculate the uncertainty in the gradient by using lines of maximum and minimum gradient. If the uncertainty is large, then the relationship may not be linear. If it is a linear relationship, then finding the equation for the line of best fit will be useful. Remember that a linear relationship is of the form  y  =  mx  +  c,  where:  ◗  y  is the dependent variable plotted on the vertical axis  ◗  x  is the independent variable on the horizontal axis  ◗  m y x  = ∆ ∆ (the gradient of your graph)  ◗  c  is the  y  intercept from your graph.  Never  force a line of best fit through the origin. The intercept gives you useful information. It may even indicate a systematic error, such as a zero error in calibration of your equipment. When you plot your raw data, you may find that one or two points are outliers. These are points that do not fit the pattern of the rest of the data. These points may be mistakes; for example, they may have been incorrectly recorded or a mistake was made during measurement. They may also be telling you something important. For example, if they occur at extreme values of the independent variable then it might be that the behaviour of the system is linear in a certain range only. You may choose to ignore outliers when fitting a line to your data, but you should be able to justify why. Extrapolation is when you extend a line of best fit beyond your measured points. You must be cautious in how you treat extrapolated data since you do not have any evidence that the system continues to behave in the same way outside the range of your measured data points. Interpolation is where you use data points from your line of best fit that were not your original measured data. If your line of best fit matches your data points well, then you would have reasonable confidence in the validity of these interpolated data. Hence, you can use interpolated data in your analysis. Relationships between variables are often not linear. If you plot your raw data (for instance the volume and pressure of a gas) and it is a curve, then  do not draw a straight line through it . In this case you need to think a little harder. If your hypothesis predicts the shape of the curve, then try fitting a theoretical curve to your data. If it fits well, then your hypothesis is supported. Sometimes the relationship between variables will be more complicated than a linear relationship. In this case, a graph is still useful, but the most you might be able to give is a descriptive relationship; for example, one variable increases with another, or that there is a peak at a particular position. A graph is still a useful way of identifying trends and patterns, even if you are not able to extract a mathematical relationship from the graph.  Interpreting your results  Once you have analysed your results, you need to interpret them. This means being able to either answer your research question or state whether your results support your hypothesis. If your hypothesis is not supported, it is not enough to simply say ‘our hypothesis is wrong’. If the hypothesis is wrong,  what  is wrong with it? Go through your method, results and analysis. Check that your equipment was calibrated, and that you were using it correctly. Check that all data has been recorded in the correct units, and that all units have been correctly carried through all calculations during analysis. Check your analysis carefully. You should also consider whether other factors may have affected your results. Were there variables that you weren’t able to control? Were there variables that you forgot to control?  Data points  Some helpful advice on deciding the number of data points  9780170408998 CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES 18  Experiments that do not support predictions based on existing models are crucial in the progress of science. It is these experiments that tell us that there is more to find out, and inspire our curiosity as scientists.  ●  It is never good enough to conclude that ‘the experiment didn’t work’. Either a mistake was made or the model used was not appropriate for the situation. It is your job to work out which.  ●  You must know the uncertainty in your results to be able to test your hypothesis.  KEY CONCEPTS  Communicating your understanding  If research is not reported on, then no-one else can learn from it. An investigation is not complete until the results have been communicated. Most commonly a report is written. However, scientists may communicate their research in other ways, such as through posters, demonstrations, public lectures, websites, videos and blogs (Figure 1.10). All of these are useful ways of communicating your understanding too, and you need to select the mode that best suits the content you wish to communicate and the audience to whom you wish to communicate with. Think about your audience and purpose and use appropriate language and style. A poster is not usually as formal as a report. A video or web page may be more or less formal, depending on your audience. Posters and websites use a lot of images. Images are usually more appealing than words and numbers, but they need to be relevant. Make sure they communicate the information you want them to.  1.6  Information and communication technology capability  Numeracy  Literacy  FIGURE 1.10  A poster session is a common way to present scientific findings at a conference.  Reproduced with permission of Helen Kiriazis (photographer) and Heart News & Views, International Society for Heart Research  Consider accessibility if you are creating a website. Fonts need to be large enough and clear on websites and digital images should have tags. You can follow the weblink for more information on accessibility and web page design.  Writing reports  A report is a formal and carefully structured account of your investigation or depth study. It is based on the data and analysis in your logbook. However, the report is a  summary . It contains only a small fraction of what appears in the logbook. Your logbook contains all your ideas, rough working and raw data. The report typically contains almost none of this.  Website accessibility  The Royal Society for the Blind has information on making websites accessible.  9780170408998  CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES 19  Reports are always written in the past tense, because they describe what you have done. The abstract is a very short summary of the entire report, typically between 50 and 200 words long. It appears at the start of the report, but is always the last thing that you write. Try writing just one sentence to summarise each part of your report. The introduction tells the reader why you did the investigation or depth study and what your research question or hypothesis was. This is the place to explain why the research is interesting. The introduction also includes the literature review, which gives the background information needed to be able to understand the rest of the report. The introduction for a secondary source report is similar to that for a primary source investigation. In either case, it is important to reference all your sources correctly. The method summarises what you did. It says what you measured and how you measured it. It is not a recipe for someone else to follow. It also explains briefly why you chose a particular method or technique. For a primary source investigation, the method describes how you carried out your experiments or observations in enough detail that someone with a similar knowledge level could repeat your experiments. It should include large, clear diagrams of equipment set-up, circuits, etc. You should have diagrams in your logbook, but these are generally rough sketches. Diagrams should be redrawn neatly for a report, as in Figure 1.11.  ●  A report consists of several distinct sections, each with a particular purpose. –  Abstract –  Introduction –  Method –  Results and analysis –  Discussion –  Conclusion –  Acknowledgements –  References –  Appendices  KEY CONCEPTS  Clamp Burette Conical flask  FIGURE 1.11  a  A sketch of a titration from a logbook;  b  a scientific illustration for a report  a  b  9780170408998 CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES 20  The method section for a secondary source investigation is generally shorter. If you are doing a review of the current literature on a topic then your method will say what literature searches you carried out, and how you decided which sources to use. The results section is a  summary  of your results. It is usually combined with the analysis section, although they may be kept separate. Tables comparing the results of different experiments or secondary sources are useful. But avoid including long tables of raw data in your report. If you need to include a lot of raw data, then put it in an appendix attached to the end of the report. Wherever possible, use a graph instead of a table. However, your graph should be for the averages, not all the raw data. Think about what sort of graph is appropriate. If you want to show a relationship between two variables, then use a scatter graph. Display your data as points and clearly label any lines you have fitted to the data. Column graphs are useful for comparing two data sets, such as the average time taken for 5  g of calcium carbonate chips and powder to react.  Do not  use a column graph to try to show a mathematical relationship between variables. Examples of these two types of graphs are shown in Figure 1.12.  10  Relative density  Aluminium Copper  Iron Sodium Magnesium 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  Density (g/cm 3 )  0  10  20  30  40 100 80 60 40 20 0  Mass (g) Volume (mL)  Density of aluminium  Line of best fit  FIGURE 1.12  a  A column graph can be used for discrete data;  b  a scatter graph is used to show a mathematical relationship between continuous data.  a  b  Any data and derived results should be given in correct SI units with their uncertainties. If you performed calculations, then show the equations you used. You might want to show one example calculation, but do not show more than one if the procedure used is repeated. The discussion should summarise  what your results mean . If you began with a research question, give the answer to the question here. If you began with a hypothesis, state whether or not your results supported your hypothesis. If not, explain why. If your investigation led you to more questions, as is often the case, say what further work could be done to answer those questions. The conclusion is a  very  brief summary of the results and their implications. Say what you found out and what it means. A conclusion should only be a few sentences long. Scientific reports often include acknowledgements thanking people and organisations that helped with the investigation. This includes people who supplied equipment or funding, as well as people who gave you good ideas or helped with the analysis. In science, as in other aspects of your life, it is always polite to say thank you.  9780170408998  CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES 21  The final section of a report is the reference list. It details the sources of all information that were used to write the report. This will generally be longer for a secondary source investigation. Wherever a piece of information or quotation is used in your report it must be referenced  at that point . This is typically done either by placing a number in brackets at the point, such as ‘[2]’, or the author and year of publication, such as ‘(Jones, 2014)’. The reference list is then either provided in a footnote at the end of each page, or as a single complete list at the end of the report. There are different formats for referencing, so check with your teacher what format they prefer. There are several good online guides to referencing. Note that a reference list is  not  the same as a bibliography. A bibliography is a list of sources that are useful to understanding the research. They may or may not have actually been used in the report. You should have a bibliography in your logbook from the planning stage of your investigation. The references will be a subset of these sources. A primary source investigation does not include a bibliography. A secondary source investigation may include a bibliography as well as references, to demonstrate the scope of your literature search. For some secondary source investigations, such as an annotated bibliography, the bibliography itself may be a major section of the report.  Referencing guide  This guide is designed to help you with referencing your sources.  Referencing i-tutorial  This tutorial will help you understand referencing and show you how to avoid plagiarism.  ●  A formal report has the same form as an article written by a scientist. It begins with an abstract briefly summarising the entire work. It includes an introduction with a literature review, a risk assessment, method, results and analysis, discussion and conclusion. All sources need to be referenced correctly.  KEY CONCEPTS  Ideas for depth studies  Throughout this book, there are suggestions for investigations in each chapter. Some of these investigations are described in detail. These investigations are designed to be useful as training exercises in learning how to perform primary investigations – how to set up equipment, make measurements, and analyse data. There are also examples of less detailed suggestions for investigations. Those investigations are there to give you ideas of how you could carry out a primary investigation. Even if your depth study is secondary source, it is important to gain some experience of doing experiments since chemistry is based on experiment. At the end of each module there is a short section called  Depth study suggestions . Here you will find ideas for primary and secondary source investigations, which build on the content of the preceding module. Your own teacher will also have ideas and suggestions. You can also generate your own ideas by reading about topics you are interested in. Consider what skills from other areas you might bring to a depth study, particularly if you are artistically creative or musical. By carrying out depth studies, you will extend your knowledge and understanding in chemistry, but more importantly, you will learn how to work scientifically – you will learn how to  do  chemistry.  1.7  9780170408998 CHAPTER 1 »  WORKING SCIENTIFICALLY AND DEPTH STUDIES  IMPORTANT NEW TERMS  After studying this chapter you should know the meaning of the following terms:  accurate  (p. 11)  controlled variable  (p. 8)  dependent variable  (p. 8)  depth study  (p. 2)  derived data  (p. 15)  empirical  (p. 2)  falsifiable  (p. 2)  hypothesis  (p. 3)  independent variable  (p. 8)  limit of reading  (p. 13)  literature review  (p. 7)  logbook  (p. 6)  measurand  (p. 13)  model  (p. 4)  outlier  (p. 13)  precision  (p. 13)  primary source data/investigation  (p. 5)  raw data  (p. 12)  reliable  (p. 10)  reproducible  (p. 10)  research question  (p. 7)  scatter plot/graph  (p. 16)  scientific method  (p. 3)  secondary source data/investigation  (p. 5)  systematic error  (p. 15)  uncertainty  (p. 10)  valid  (p. 3)  1  CHAPTER SUMMARY 1  CHAPTER SUMMARY  22  9780170408998 23  » MODULE FIVE  EQUILIBRIUM AND ACID REACTIONS  Science Photo Library/David Taylor  Qualitative equilibrium 2 Calculating the equilibrium constant 3 Solution equilibria 4  9780170408998 24 Science Photo Library  INQUIRY QUESTION  What happens when chemical reactions do not go through to completion?  INQUIRY QUESTION  What factors affect equilibrium and how?  Qualitative equilibrium 2  Students:  •  conduct practical investigations to analyse the reversibility of chemical reactions, for example:  –  cobalt(II) chloride hydrated and dehydrated  –  iron(III) nitrate and potassium thiocyanate  –  burning magnesium  –  burning steel wool  (ACSCH090)  ICT  •  model static and dynamic equilibrium and analyse the differences between open and closed systems  (ACSCH079, ACSCH091)  •  analyse examples of non-equilibrium systems in terms of the effect of entropy and enthalpy, for example:  –  combustion reactions  –  photosynthesis  •  investigate the relationship between collision theory and reaction rate in order to analyse chemical equilibrium reactions  (ACSCH070, ACSCH094)  ICT  •  investigate the effects of temperature, concentration, volume and/or pressure on a system at equilibrium and explain how Le Chatelier’s principle can be used to predict such effects, for example:  –  heating cobalt(II) chloride hydrate  –  interaction between nitrogen dioxide and dinitrogen tetroxide  –  iron(III) thiocyanate and varying concentration of ions  (ACSCH095)  •  explain the overall observations about equilibrium in terms of the collision theory  (ACSCH094)  •  examine how activation energy and heat of reaction affect the position of equilibrium.  OUTCOMES  Chemistry Stage 6 Syllabus © NSW Educational Standards Authority for and on behalf of the Crown in right of the State of New South Wales, 2017  Homework WS  Prior knowledge 9780170408998  CHAPTER 2 »  QUALITATIVE EQUILIBRIUM 25  In our everyday lives there are many examples of balance or  equilibrium . A see-saw is in equilibrium when the forces on either side are balanced and the see-saw remains horizontal. Water in a rainforest is in equilibrium when the amount of rainfall balances the amount of evaporation and use. A person’s weight is in equilibrium when the amount of energy from the food eaten balances the amount of energy used. Similarly, in chemistry, some reactions achieve a balance where the amount of reactants and products remain constant and the chemical system is in equilibrium. When these processes are occurring equally, they are balanced and equilibrium is achieved. The term ‘equilibrium’ always refers to a balance. However, in different contexts the exact meaning may vary. Therefore, it is important that you understand the requirements and processes for chemical equilibrium. The chemical reactions that you’ve observed to date have been simple one-direction reactions where you started with reactants and ended, when one of the reactants was completely used up, with the products. However, a significant number of chemical reactions can be manipulated to form more products or more reactants.  FIGURE 2.1  A see- saw can represent equilibrium.  Alamy Stock Photo/Sam Dao  Non-equilibrium systems  In  Chemistry in Focus Year 11 , chapter 16, you learnt about the importance of the two major drives,  enthalpy  and  entropy , in determining whether a chemical reaction would occur  spontaneously  or not. In summary:  ◗  A reaction will favour the movement towards greater randomness. This is indicated by a positive change in entropy ( Δ S ).  ◗  A reaction will be favoured if it releases heat energy. This is indicated by a negative change in enthalpy ( Δ H ). Hence, if:  ◗  the reaction favours the movement towards greater randomness and it also releases heat energy (that is, it has a positive entropy change and a negative enthalpy change), then the reaction will occur spontaneously. It will continue to occur until one of the reactants is completely used up. Then it will stop and there will be no further reaction.  ◗  the reaction does not favour the movement towards greater randomness and it also requires the continual input of heat energy (that is, it has a negative entropy change and a positive enthalpy change), then the reaction will not occur spontaneously. It will not react. However, it will occur spontaneously in the reverse direction.  2.1  9780170408998 MODULE FIVE »  EQUILIBRIUM AND ACID REACTIONS 26  It is more difficult to determine whether a reaction will occur spontaneously if the drivers are opposing each other; for example:  ◗  the reaction favours the movement towards greater randomness and it requires the continual input of heat energy (that is, it has a positive entropy change and a positive enthalpy change)  ◗  the reaction does not favour the movement towards greater randomness and it releases heat energy (that is, it has a negative entropy change and a negative enthalpy change). Which driver has the greater effect? It is the combination of these factors that overall determines whether the reaction will occur spontaneously or not. The Gibbs free energy ( Δ G ) is the quantity that analyses the effects of these drivers to determine whether the reaction will occur spontaneously or not at a given temperature ( T  ). It is stated as:  Δ G  =  Δ H  −  T Δ S  When  Δ G  is:  ◗  negative, the reaction will occur spontaneously  ◗  positive, the reaction will not occur spontaneously.  WORKED EXAMPLE  2.1  Determine whether the following reaction is spontaneous or not at 298  K. CH 4 (g)  +  2O 2  (g)  →  CO 2 (g)  +  2H 2 O(l) Data: (under standard conditions, i.e. at 298  K)  SPECIES  CH  4  (g)  O  2  (g)  CO  2  (g)  H  2  O(l)  ENTHALPY OF FORMATION (kJ  mol  − 1  )  − 75  0  − 393  − 285  ENTROPY (J  K  − 1  mol  − 1  )  + 186  + 205  + 214  + 70  ANSWER  LOGIC  ∆ H  =  ΣΔ H f  (products)  −  ΣΔ H f  (reactants)  Δ H  =  [ − 393  +  (2  ×  − 285)]  −  [ − 75]  =  − 888  kJ  •  Calculate the enthalpy for the reaction.  ∆ S  =  ΣΔ S (products)  −  ΣΔ S (reactants)  Δ S  =  [ + 214  +  (2  ×  + 70)]  −  [ + 186  +  (2  ×  205)]  =  − 242  JK − 1  mol − 1  •  Calculate the entropy for the reaction.  Δ G  =  Δ H  −  T Δ S  Δ G  =  − 888  −  (298  ×  − 242  ×  10 − 3 )  =  − 888  +  72  =  − 816  kJ  mol −1  •  Calculate the Gibbs free energy  −  remember to convert entropy to kJ.  The reaction is spontaneous because the Gibbs free energy is negative.  •  Refer back to question and answer in format required.  TRY THIS YOURSELF  Determine whether the following reactions are spontaneous or not at 298  K.  1  Combustion of octane: 2C 8 H 18 (l)  +  25O 2  (g)  →  16CO 2 (g)  +  18H 2 O(l)  2  Photosynthesis: 6CO 2  (g)  +  6H 2 O(l)  →  C 6 H 12 O6 (s)  +  6O  2 (g) Extra data: (under standard conditions, i.e. at 298  K)  SPECIES  C  8  H  18  (l)  C  6  H  12  O  6  (s)  ENTHALPY OF FORMATION (kJ  mol  − 1  )  − 250  − 1273  ENTROPY (JK  − 1  mol  − 1  )  + 361  + 212  Critical and creative thinking  Numeracy  9780170408998  CHAPTER 2 »  QUALITATIVE EQUILIBRIUM 27  Determining the Gibbs free energy allows us to determine whether the reaction will occur spontaneously or not. From Worked example 2.1, the Gibbs free energy indicates that combustion reactions are spontaneous at standard room temperature (298  K). A small amount of energy is added to initiate the reaction, and once combustion reactions start, they will continue until one of the reactants has been completely used up. Two familiar combustion reactions are shown in Figure 2.2. However, the Gibbs free energy for the photosynthesis reaction indicates that it is not a spontaneous reaction. It will only occur when a significant amount of energy is supplied or a catalyst is used with a lesser amount of energy being supplied. Photosynthesis occurs in green plants because they have chlorophyll, a necessary catalyst for this reaction to occur. Photosynthesis also only occurs during the day when the UV energy from the sun is readily available. The reactants and products of respiration are the reverse of those of photosynthesis. Respiration is the combustion reaction of glucose. Hence, the Gibbs free energy for respiration is negative, so it will occur spontaneously. This reaction occurs every day in our bodies to provide the energy we need to live. However, sometimes the thermochemical data is not as straightforward as it was for the above examples. What happens when the change in Gibbs free energy for a reaction is very close to zero? Remember, when  Δ G  is:  ◗  negative, the reaction will occur spontaneously  ◗  positive, the reaction will not occur spontaneously (however, the reverse reaction would occur spontaneously). So, when  Δ G  for a reaction is very close to zero, it would indicate that the reactants could form products, while at the same time the products could react to form the reactants. Hence, there are two reactions occurring at the same time when all species are present.  a  b  FIGURE 2.2  Gas cooking involves combustion reactions:  a  a barbeque and  b  a gas stove.  Shutterstock.com/Torwaistudio Getty Images/Yuri_Arcurs  9780170408998 MODULE FIVE »  EQUILIBRIUM AND ACID REACTIONS 28  Reversible reactions  If a car is put in reverse, it will go backwards. Therefore, the term  reversible reaction  must mean a reaction that is able to go backwards. But how is that so? Surely the reactants must form the products. They do, but sometimes the products can form the reactants.  Chemical systems  The chemicals involved in a reaction form the  chemical system , while anything around these chemicals but not involved in the actual reaction forms the  surroundings .  For example, in the reaction between hydrogen gas and oxygen gas to form water vapour, the molecules of hydrogen, oxygen and water make up the system, while the other molecules in the air (for example, nitrogen, carbon dioxide) form the surroundings. In an aqueous environment, the water will form part of the system if it is involved in the reaction and it will form the surroundings if it is not involved (Figure 2.3). If the chemicals in the reaction are all contained within a certain space, this is called a  closed system . For example, if hydrochloric acid was added to calcium carbonate in a sealed container, then nothing can enter or leave the system and it is described as a closed system. Conversely, if substances can either be added or lost, then this is described as an  open system . For example, if hydrochloric acid is added to calcium carbonate in an open beaker, then the carbon dioxide gas produced would escape into the air. Therefore, this is an open system. When referring to an open or closed system, it is referring to whether matter can either enter or leave or not. In both situations, energy is able to enter and leave the system.  Physical and chemical changes  The change that occurs in a chemical system can be described as a  physical change  or a  chemical change . During a physical change, the products do not include any new substances. Instead, the physical properties of the reactant change, which can include a change of state. For example, when water is boiled, it changes from a liquid to a gas (Figure 2.4). The molecules remain the same; they are simply further apart. This change can be represented by the equation: H 2 O(l)  →  H 2 O(g) During a chemical change, the reactants produce new substances with different physical and chemical properties from those of the original substances. For this to happen, the atoms rearrange and form products that are different from the reactants. An example of a chemical change occurs when an electric current is passed through water. The atoms in the reactant (water) rearrange to form the new substances of oxygen gas and hydrogen gas: 2H 2 O(l)  →  2H 2 (g)  +  O 2 (g) Figure 2.5 shows this reaction.  2.2  Science Photo Library/Andrew Lambert Photography  FIGURE 2.3  A closed system does not allow chemicals to enter or leave.  Liquid  Gas  FIGURE 2.4  Water boiling is a physical change.  9780170408998  CHAPTER 2 »  QUALITATIVE EQUILIBRIUM 29  Reversible reactions  When you consider chemical reactions, you often think of a situation where the reaction occurs in one direction and the reactants continue to produce the products until one of the reactants is used up and the reaction stops. This is  static equilibrium . In reality, this only happens for some reactions. In other reactions, as the products are formed, some of them will react to become reactants again. This means that when the reaction appears ‘complete’, there are both reactants and products present. This is  dynamic equilibrium . Reactions where the reactants are able to form products and the products form reactants are known as reversible reactions. All physical changes are reversible reactions. However, only some chemical changes are reversible. The reaction where the reactants form products is called the  forward reaction  and the reaction 